okay here we go
three two one boom and we're live mr.
Shermer how are you sir I'm fine thank
you I'm still breathing it's good to see
you again we were just saying before we
got started that the last time we saw
each other was we went to dinner about
six weeks ago and you're thinking that
that might be the end of that kind of
stuff that was my last time I've been in
a restaurant actually and well I you
know I think restaurants of course will
reopen but I think the kind of social
distancing we're seeing now it's not
going to go all the way back to the way
it used to be I think we may quit
shaking hands and hugging to the extent
that we used to although I don't think
we'll ever ever go all the way to the
say the Japanese model of social
distancing but I think there'll be
modifications like that the other thing
I've been thinking about is the change
of remote say meetings and education I
mean I'm in the studio here in Santa
Barbara where I've been recording
lectures for my Chapman University class
skepticism 101 and I just upload them
and share them with the students and and
then they watch them and then I send
them a quiz they take the quiz they send
them back now that's not a complete
replacement of a brick and mortar
building with a small class seminar
discussion say but but it does you know
not adequately replace a lot of
traditional education that you don't
really need to be in a classroom for do
you think that this is preparing us for
the ultimate where we embrace the
symbiotic relationship that we have with
computers and become one with the
machine I mean it seems like we're
worried yeah we're coming closer and
closer to some sort of an electronic
community it's weird yeah I think was I
think it was happening slowly already
and this is kind of a jump-starting it I
mean already tech companies like zoom
are having to you know ramp up their
game because you know the systems are
crashing because pretty much everybody's
doing zoom meetings now yeah and then
they have to it and they have to adjust
the zoom bombing because of Moore's
there's no people like that out there
they just want to screw with you and so
I and then I was also thinking about
things like theatres you know - what why
do we need to go to theaters anymore I
mean I love watching a movie on a big
screen but you know the the screens we
have at home now big television screens
super high-def
you know why not just watch movies at
home well I don't think we're gonna have
much of a choice I was reading an
article this morning about AMC Theaters
might they might have to go under
because of this really yeah that's not
good I mean you got to think these
companies are accustomed to having a
certain amount of money coming in every
month and they never no one anticipated
anything like this we're all businesses
are just gonna shut down gyms I mean how
many gyms are gonna go under how many
yoga studios many I mean it's a it's a
strange and trying time for people who
have small businesses for sure yeah one
of my cycling buddies owns the LA cañada
theater complex and and of course rents
out the space to different retailers
including the theater theater managers
and anyway he was telling me that you
know they normally pay ninety three
thousand dollars a month in rent but you
know they bring in like seven and a half
million dollars a year or something so
it all balances out but they just told
him we're not gonna make our rent this
month so he has to go to his mortgage
company you know the bank they were he
gets pays off his mortgage and so I
can't pay you this month because these
guys can't pay me and okay so multiply
that by you know 10 million or 100
million or something and that's kind of
what we've been going through yeah and I
don't really understand the economics of
this stimulus package of how they're
going to be able to distribute it and
sort of balance people out it seems like
it's just a small band-aid on a very
large wound yeah well of course the
government can't just print money right
indefinite indefinitely then we're gonna
get huge inflation and then and that
could be catastrophic you know so this
conversation that people have been
wanting to have but they get hammered
every time they bring it up I think at
some point we're gonna have to have in
the next few weeks is the economic
trade-off and costs to people's lives
compared to what we're doing with social
social isolation to save people's lives
yeah and at the at the moment we're in
the mode of there's no dollar amount you
could put on a human life there for
total social isolation no matter what it
does to the economy is what we're gonna
do now well but at some point you know
you know there's a economic calculation
like how many people are gonna die say
in the next year if we never open the
economy of course we will but you know
at what point do you do that you know
the supply chain dries
you can't get not just toilet paper but
you know food supplies start to dry up
and then you get social unrest and you
know there's risks there too
you know yeah and the idea of putting a
dollar figure on a human life is
repulsive to most of us I think
intuitively in this context but in fact
we do it all the time you know in terms
of like an automobile company has to pay
off the family of somebody who died in
their car well there are people who do
those calculations like what's the value
of a human life and the figure is well
the high-end figure is about ten million
dollars now after 9/11 the families got
paid off I think it was two hundred
fifty thousand dollars a person times
the three thousand something and you
know so it sounds so cold like who does
those calculations well statisticians do
that sort of thing and attorneys and
accountants work on that and judges and
juries have to face it and you know
that's kind of a normal part of other
aspects of life that we're not used to
thinking about most of us don't think
about it but you know at some point
that's the kind of calculation we're
gonna have to do for what we're in now
do you think that there's another way to
do this there's there's been some talk
of isolating the people that are high
risk isolating the people with
underlying conditions people that are
elderly things of that nature
do you think that that's a way that they
can move forward yeah for sure but again
people we're you know we have this
egalitarian mode life that doesn't sound
right sounds like a panel yeah some
group of people some group of government
agents are gonna tell us who who's gonna
live and who's gonna die and that feels
like we're sliding into conspiracy
mongering but in fact that that is what
you have to do is a kind of a triage and
you know South Korea's has been pretty
good about this you know testing
everybody they jumped on it right away
they did that track and trace that you
know they got it right down to I think
it was the 31st patient they found who
had gone to to church services and then
she was in a car accident and taken to
the hospital and and that's when it
spread from there that that one day I
think it was in late February where that
when that happened and they just jumped
jumped all over it total deaths in South
Korea I think is like two
a couple hundred compared to most other
countries so this is a ways it is and
they've been you know super careful
about isolating people and targeting the
people that most need the tests and so
on and you know that's just the kind of
thing I think we have to do what do you
think about what's going on in Germany
because Germany is very fascinating
right it's I mean some of these European
countries particularly Italy are
experiencing this very high death rate
but Germany I mean they must have
exemplary health care they must be doing
something right or be robust and healthy
individuals is it a genetic thing you
think is it a healthcare thing because
they have a very low death rate I think
they have a high tight culture a very
tight culture that is when my wife's
from Cologne Germany so I know this from
personal experience with also their
studies Michele gelfand does these
studies on loose and tight cultures and
that Germany is a very tight culture
that is to say very law and order
law-abiding and you know when the German
government says alright this is what
we're gonna do people do it and
Americans are not that we're much looser
culture more freedom oriented and if the
government says you can't go to the
beach like well the hell with it I'm
going the beach anyway Germans don't do
that and they do have a really good
health care system and they jump right
on it and I think that's one explanation
you know we've seen yesterday this rise
in deaths of African Americans versus
you know white Americans yeah and having
to do with income but of course money is
just a proxy for something else which
has to do with the quality of the health
care they get the food that they eat you
know how much how healthy and exercise
prone they are not diabetes obesity
these sorts of things you know down the
line when you're attacked by a virus
like that can have an effect on your
immune system and therefore the response
to the disease so I think those are the
kinds of cohorts we're gonna have to
target to save lives and I think
countries like South Korea and Germany
have been doing that pretty well without
pushback yeah I'm hoping my best hope
out of this is that it's a wake-up call
for people that don't take care of their
bodies the people that get through this
like you you dodged the bullet now let's
clean that diet up let's get you moving
let's start some exercise on a
regular weekly basis get some nutrients
into your system eliminate all the sugar
and bullshit that people eat and you
know and take care of your body and take
care of your immune system let's pump
everything back up to sustainable levels
and I mean that very well could be the
difference between people who contract
this virus and survive versus people who
contract this virus and don't absolutely
I mean how could it not hurt to be
healthy fit and have a good immune
system even if for some reason we can't
find the exact connection to this
particular virus just as a global thing
even if you do all that and it turns out
there's no connection to this particular
virus there's still a good thing to do
yeah you've been cycling or you know
you're a cycler and so you were actually
riding your bike today right yeah this
morning actually this is really funny
this kind of world we live and there's
no more group rides of course right and
you know moat and all the the big tours
like the Tudor France have been canceled
so there I'm riding along this morning
and I see up ahead of me
TJ van Garderen who's the top American
Pro right now and apparently he lives
over in that kind of Santa Ynez Valley
area and here he is cycling along in
Santa Barbara by himself so I'm chasing
along to see how long I can stay up with
this guy he's much younger and faster
than me but all of a sudden he just
stops and he picks up and up from the
ground so I pull up and he holds up a $5
bill he goes look I found five bucks
like man it's the little things in life
just kind of make your day he was happy
with the five bucks and I got to say hi
to the great TJ van garderen spent I
don't follow professional cycling but I
can understand your enthusiasm if he's
the top guy that's pretty cool yeah I
was so yeah so I think you know just
working out every day I mean you
mentioned every week I think people need
to work out every day yeah sure and I
find the more you work out the you know
you don't have to eat as much because
your body becomes more efficient at
processing fuel so I have less desire to
eat really yeah not me baby when I my
god I get so hungry yeah I don't know
I've been trying I've been doing that
after you were promoting that the daily
fast you know no don't eat from
dinnertime and I try to make it to like
11 or 12 and if I work out in the
morning
if I go for a couple hour bike ride I
can make it because you're doing
something yeah because they're sitting
around and you're gonna get hungry I do
that yeah I do intermittent fasting I
try to do 16 hours you know the only
time I don't do that is when I have
explosive work that I'm doing in the
morning like if I'm doing my tie or
something like that that requires like a
lot of work then I'll just have a couple
pieces of fruit but I keep it pretty
light mmm but other than that I'll try
to do 16 hours I'm doing a I do a 16
hour non feeding phase and then just eat
in the other time and your body gets
accustomed to it it's not hard it's not
hard to do because it's just it becomes
normal the other thing I did that I've
been recommending that people that are
not into cycling or something like that
is I got these wrist and ankle weights
just at the local sporting goods store
but you can order them on Amazon just
five pounds each wrist five pounds each
ankle and just walk briskly I just take
my dog to local park and we just go up
this hill on down up and down this hill
with these weights and you don't have to
run you know I know people don't like
running and I don't like running all
that much but with the weights you get
you know extra extra upper-body and it
works for the big muscles of your legs
you know without you know I know a lot
of people hate running so you know it's
like you don't have to run just walk to
get the heart rate up work the big
muscles and you know circulate the blood
and all the bodily fluids and so on and
that's just good for general health and
I do think that has to help for response
to the coronavirus again these
populations that are more targeted you
know they you know there's a lot of
obesity and and you know diabetes and
some of these other secondary you know
these pre conditions as they call them
and you know there's this peculiar thing
we're all doing now like what I've done
for years is you look in the obits and
you see okay well this guy he was older
than me or he had this or he had that
doesn't apply to me you know we all do
that with the corona bike okay oh that
person was old or they had this
precondition and so on you're hope
you're hoping that somehow I'm gonna
dodge that this bullet because of that
it may not be but it's all a game of
probabilities of just stacking the odds
in our favor you know who knows if
that'll make a difference for you or me
personally but on average it's got to
make a difference this is a it's such a
strange virus isn't it in terms of
the way so many people are asymptomatic
yeah so I this idea that it came to
America of what January 28th or
something in Seattle I have a feeling
it's going to turn out to been earlier
like in December I was reading this
nature paper on the origins of the virus
they were sort of debunking the myth
that it was a creation of a you know bio
weapons lab in China there is that
conspiracy theory which is not
completely crazy because of course there
are there are bio weapons labs that do
this kind of stuff there was that one in
Russia a few decades ago where they had
a leakage but but it looked like I've
read this article twice I don't
understand because this isn't what I do
but you know they they really showed
that it very very likely made the leap
from probably bats
you know bats are mammals bats are very
response bateau II they're they're very
social you know there's this cave in
Texas where there's like 20 million bats
that live in this cave I mean they're
just pressed in it's like the same
population of Mexico City and they come
out at night and so on and you know
these wet markets and one-china it's
it's not that wet markets by themselves
are bad but you know say you have dead
fish it's a wet market but live animals
and particularly mammals like bats then
it's easy to make that that leap so you
know the corona buyer it's you know it's
a it's an they call it a novel
coronavirus for a reason it's novel you
mean there's other coronaviruses around
yeah common cold is a corona virus and
you know so there's I have a I have a
feeling Joe we're gonna have this virus
with us permanently I mean this is what
bouchy has been saying that it's not
gonna just go away and then we're done I
think we're gonna have probably a
mutated more modest strain of it forever
and we'll just have to get our flu shots
for that one every year and and you know
just kind of mitigate it that way yeah
if you've been paying attention to this
these potential remedies like
hydroxychloroquine makes me see packs
and and and zinc what do you thoughts on
that I took it for two days did you yeah
I did yeah
well a couple I know maybe a month ago
now my doc who's also a good friend and
a fellow cyclist he he's the guy that
did my neck surgery you know I had a
fusion on my neck after I had a bad bike
crash last year and so he's a good
friend and and so he just texts me out
of blue goes hey
have you heard about this
hydroxychloroquine and no one ever heard
of it
oh yeah the you know the malaria drug
okay all right so he works at a big
hospital in La Huntington Hospital and
you know so I could I can understand why
he you know was doing it as a
precautionary thing as a prophylactic
against it and there's some evidence
anecdotal the you know but anyway so I
try he brought me a script I tried it
for two days it's pretty toxic you know
if you follow the the prescription
exactly you know the chances of having
bad side effects are pretty low so when
Trump says you know what have you got to
lose
of course nothing's risk-free but if you
follow the the exact prescription then
the chances of having that effects are
pretty low unlike that guy in Arizona
that that found it in his fish tank
Wiener here we had some it was some fish
antifungal chemical and he drank it and
died okay you know you can't do that
kind of stuff but that would apply to
any kind of medication yeah right anyway
so I tried it for two days and I you
know I didn't feel good you know work
out and then I came back one day and my
wife says you know you stink like a
toxin like like poison I'm like okay
yeah good well you're not taken unless
you get in contact right or you think we
could have been in contact well you know
I don't know again it could be that lots
of us that's that part right yeah I
don't know yeah I don't I don't know the
that's what keeps people up at night
you're lying in bed you're like what
about that guy he was close to me what
about this what about that what if
someone some of the grocery stores got
it and I touched the cart two of my
cycling buddies had really bad colds in
December dry cough fever you know all
the symptoms and they're now saying huh
I wonder if I had it in December yeah
and the reason this is important to know
is because that would increase the size
of the denominator of the equation where
you have the number of deaths divided by
the number of people that got it and
it's that bottom number we just don't
know because the testing has just been
ramped up so there might be lots of
people that add it in january/february
and they got better we've you know we
just don't know or they were symptom
free and they didn't know they had it or
maybe even earlier say December that
nature paper I reference they trade
about how they do this genetically with
mutations or whatever but to say
mid-november in China hmm so you know
people were coming from China to the
United States and throughout November
and December so it's entirely possible
it's been here longer and therefore the
death rate is not nearly as catastrophic
as it seems like it could be this is
there a way to test whether or not
you've had it before antibodies I think
there's a test now I don't think it's in
the United States where was this maybe
it was maybe it was South Korea but just
a pinprick and they can tell if you've
already had it based on the antibodies
in your blood that would only be there
if you had the coronavirus I think I
think it was South Korea that was doing
that and that absolutely has to be done
because we have to know what the number
is yeah and and also if you've had it
and you have the antibodies in your
blood then you can donate your blood and
give it to somebody then that would
sense be something like a vaccine yeah
that's all that's all very promising you
know it's it's really interesting too
because this has become such a hot
political topic you know there's so many
people that are angry at Trump but they
were angry at Trump back when he was
closing the travel from China which
turned out to be a great idea and you
know Donald Trump jr. tweeted today a
compilation of CNN and all these other
different networks giving out bad
information way back in January bad
information saying this is going to be
fine don't worry you know it's not as
deadly as the fluish worried about the
flu you know don't change your plans
don't do anything so a lot of people got
this wrong and but so many people are
trying to make this a political point
right now and it's really it's so so
useless
it's you know pointing fingers and
everything at this point in time it's
like what they need to concentrate on
now is just getting masks getting PPE
equipment keeping people healthy if they
can and then educating people on how to
keep your immune system strong and let's
you know let's try to let's try to get
people to understand the consequences of
not taking care of your body this has to
be the worst job in the world president
no matter what no matter what you do
everyone's gonna have to people are
gonna hate you who would want that job I
don't know because it doesn't even pay
that well compared to other perfections
at the top end of other professions you
know it there's a lot of articles now
about how autocrats around the world
have been taking advantage of the of the
pandemic to increase their power
yes well civil liberties you know in
Hungary and and in Turkey even Israel
China of course Putin in Russia and so
on and Trump usually gets lumped in
there like he's an autocrat like Obon
and and everyone and and Netanyahu and
and so forth okay so then so had he
closed let's say do the counterfactual
let's say he closed the borders in late
January or early February or something
like this I mean just just just clamp
down on all travel and so on he would
have been totally accused of being an
autocrat he's you know he wants to be a
dictator and look what he's doing
yeah okay so he doesn't do that and then
he's accused of you know not doing
enough when it looks like we should have
done more and then you know the other
day when he said well I'm not gonna I'm
not going to tell all the governors what
to do you know I'm gonna honor states
rights for now and of course he gets
hammered for that it's like but you know
but that's actually what I'm supposed to
do that's not what an autocrat would do
and all that crap would say yeah I'm
telling everybody what to do right it's
so exact you know yeah you know I think
maybe we should you know drop all the
polarization politically rally around
the president even if you hate him just
look what happened after 9/11 yeah I
mean Bush was pretty hated by the left
and and most liberals came around said
all right you know what we're gonna
support this guy at least for a few
months until you know we figure out
what's going on here and most of the
Liberal Democratic congressmen and
senators voted for the war and you know
for the invasion of Afghanistan and
including Iraq including Hillary right
so you know maybe we ought to do that I
know people just can't stand Trump and
just the idea like saying something nice
or supportive we're not being critical
seems hard to do but you know maybe this
is way worse than 9/11 yeah it and it's
it you're what you're saying is totally
correct it's it seems like the
polarization is even worse
then when it was in 2001 it seems like
it just keeps ramping up and Trump is
such a naturally polarizing figure that
it's gotten you know the the left versus
right has gotten so extreme right now
it's almost impossible for rational
discourse and this is one of the reasons
why it's a good time now to talk about
your book given the devil - I'm just
showing this graph of the people that
self identify as centrist versus now
which is more polarized you have this
two hump camel here and that's from 2019
ninety four two thousand four and then
close to today when did that shift is
that a trump shift that low no no no
about 2000 well really under Obama about
2008 the polarization got worse and
worse I mean we can speculate why but
that's pretty much when it happened a
bit around 2004 2005 and it gets ramped
up so just pollsters asking people you
know how do you self-identify you know
centrist far-left far-right you know
strong Republicans strong Democrat
whatever and so that middle ground has
been has been shrinking the center's
have been shrinking and the polls have
been increasing so more and more people
are polarize now you know conservative
talk radio and television or you know
it's MSNBC you know whatever you want to
accuse the media but but in general I
think we've just been more polarized in
the sense of not just saying well I
disagree with you I think you're wrong
but that you're evil you're you're
you're immoral you know this is you know
the the worst thing that's ever happened
to us and so on this kind of ramping up
of the catastrophism you know it's not
healthy no no it's not you know another
thing I wanted to talk to you about
Michael is there's an article today in
the Atlantic which is really interesting
it's about technology it's contact
tracking technology and this there's a
real concern about this stuff first of
all the idea is great that if you that
this could free America from quarantine
so this is always the risk right the
risk is just give up a little bit of
your civil liberties give up a little
bit of your freedom and we're going to
keep you safe and you know it brings you
to the old Benjamin Franklin quote you
know he who would
Liberty for freedom deserves neither
neither or Liberty for safety I'm sure
I've fucked up that quote but this is
technology is very interesting because
they're using it in South Korea and
they're using it in Singapore and I I
the the title of the article in the
Atlantic is the technology that could
free America from quarantine it's out
today and they bring up this conundrum I
mean nobody wants to give up civil
liberties and civil liberties lost or
rarely regained and this is the real
concern here that if you do allow people
to track who you're in contact with and
make sure that okay you're testing
negative and you're in contact with
people that also test negative so you're
okay you're okay to travel now like this
is you know this is a very weird thing
and it gets us a very gray area how do
you feel about this I feel about this
way I I'm in general I I'm against that
sort of thing I like the idea of privacy
and that I do have a right to not be
tracked and you know you can't have
cameras in my home or my yard and so on
in general I think across the board
that's a good principle and it follows
the Constitution I think there are times
a national emergency like this of course
there's always the risk that you know
any auto crack and declare a national
emergency grab the power and never give
it back and I mentioned examples of this
before in Turkey say but the difference
here I think is you know we do have a
constitution we do have states rights we
do have courts that litigate these sorts
of things I could see a reasonable
measure being taken for let's say we're
going to do the following for six months
until we see what happens with this
pandemic and then once that's over then
we're gonna revert back now let's say
the governor or the president says well
I'm not going back well then you have
courts then we and you sue the state or
you sue the federal government for
violations of civil liberties and then
you can get them back right but they do
never happen we've never gotten battle
what happened to NSA when Edward Snowden
revealed how much tracking is actually
going on I mean that's never been
reversed I know I know yeah I know who's
Terry I watched that show you when you
had
and oh boy that was pretty disturbing
very disturbing it was also disturbing
was that now it's been proven that the
Obama administration lied they lied
about what you know is like just
metadata there's no concern that was not
metadata that they were they were able
to read people's emails right yes and
you know these this program was started
in a bush and so supposedly when Obama
became president it's like you know the
the transparent president so we're gonna
we're gonna stop doing that well that's
not the case so here's a good argument
for you know WikiLeaks and and the
Pentagon Papers that I recognize is
valuable that we wouldn't have known
that without Snowden or the or the
vetting on papers and you know it's good
to know what you know what your
government is up to and you know you
know in our mutual favorite subjects of
conspiracy theories you know we didn't
know about a lot of the things Kennedy
was doing and Johnson you know and all
the way back to Eisenhower lying about
the Vietnam War for example until the
Pentagon Papers came out and then in the
90s the Church Committee on conspiracies
from the 70s a lot of those documents
were released and there was that that
business about the operation Northwoods
where kennedy administration people
brought to him this idea of a false flag
operation over cuba make it look like
the russians were harassing our aircraft
or our airports as an excuse to invading
Cuba or assassinating Castro and so on
it's like you know like when you had
Alex Jones on he talks about false flag
operations and most of us skeptics go oh
that's a bunch of nonsense and then you
read this these documents that are
revealed in the in these release secret
documents like Wow okay so we did do
that not just that signed by the Joint
Chiefs of Staff vetoed by Kennedy was
like what the hell are you doing you
know and then finds himself dead less
than a year later right
you know in all the shenanigans of
American intelligent agents manipulating
elections in South American you know
democracies in the money in the model of
well he may be a son of a bitch but he's
our son of a bitch yeah right so we'd
rather said we would rather support the
fascist dictator rather than the
communist dictator it's like what are we
doing doing that anyway right well
that's what we do it's like wait a
minute
does the public know about this to
Congress approve this no okay so you
know this is one reason people believe
conspiracy theories is because a lot of
them are true yeah not all of them but I
point to with you with the Epstein case
like you were one of the first people I
mean as a literally you're a
professional skeptic and you looked at
some of the evidence you leg up well you
know what this might be a conspiracy you
know and when I said when Michael
Shermer thinks it might be conspiracy
it's probably a goddamn conspiracy
there's been enough of them I'm still
not sure about that one because after I
posted something about the you know the
two cameras broke or whatever somebody
wrote me from that prison saying all
those cameras are always breaking like
it's a little convenient though that you
know he winds up strangling himself in a
way that Michael battened the the famous
autopsy doctor says is completely
inconsistent with hanging and much more
consistent with someone strangling you
include including the actual area where
he was hanging from supposedly like it's
consistent with someone strangling you
from behind not consistent with you
hanging by your own weight yeah after
Weinstein got his is Harvey Weinstein
got his conviction I thought oh boy but
they better have a real suicide watch on
this guy because yeah he's he surely has
a black book just as big as Epstein's oh
I'm sure well I think with what he's got
is probably more incriminating to him
though you know I think what he's got is
probably hey I had sex with all these
starlets and turned them into big
celebrities and this and I bet he
probably doesn't want that out
especially at this stage of the game
nothing I don't think anything he's
God's gonna make him look good and I
think the thing with Epstein is he knew
way too much about too many powerful
people there's just so so many
connections that could be made with that
guy and that you know to this day people
are asking questions that people like
Bill Gates don't want to answer or
Prince Andrew or any of these people
they're like you know I don't want to
talk about this yeah and I didn't hear
the won't about Gates but Prince Andrew
of course apparently flew on the lolita
Express four years after he was
convicted
okay Wow all right according to the
Daily Mirror or whatever the fuck it was
I know I would I would ask Jamie to look
that up but I've got his computer right
now gonna win your iPad find out if it's
true of Bill Gates Luna Lolita Express
because that's what I was reading today
there people are trying to ask Bill
Gates but it's so hard to know what's
true and what's not true today that's
the thing is there's so much data and so
I mean one of the things that's really
sad about the loss of respect for
mainstream journalism and mainstream
media is well if we count can't count on
them
then who's regulating the independence
who's regulating these websites who's
regulating these people that are just
you know so-called independent
journalists that are just tweeting
things and finding things putting things
up on their websites it's it's so hard
to tell who's telling the truth and
who's not who I was when I was working
on giving the devil is do I had this was
kind of a challenge to me because I feel
like there's so much fake news they're
real affect news and and you know and
just bogus theories and particularly in
my areas of you know quack medicine and
cancer cures and now coronavirus cures
you know like Jim you know the old
televangelist Jim Baker was selling
those silver pills that you were
supposed to take silver derivative pills
that were supposed to fight the corona
virus whatever you know so a lot of that
stuff is dangerous to have out there but
as a civil libertarian I feel like well
but I'm a free speech fundamentalist I
really believe you know people sort of
just lying about somebody or giving away
the nuclear codes or something like that
you know just let a thousand flowers
bloom and just see but you know what
just shine sunlight on all of them and
see which ones rise to the top because
they're supported by evidence there's a
risk to that that is to say you know
people will take bad information and
they'll go shoot up a pizzeria or
something like that or not now these you
know this conspiracy theory about 5g
related to the corona virus that is to
say the theory is that 5g is causing
people to feel ill to take Cal and that
the government made up the corporation's
made up this story about the corona
virus as a distraction from 5g okay this
is nonsense that's so criminally stupid
you know do you know who Lil Duval is
you know of course not
he's a hilarious comedian
who also has a great Instagram page and
he put something up today he retweeted
something it says if 140 184 countries
have Corona and only 5 countries have 5g
towers why the fuck would you dummies
why the fuck would you idiots think that
5g towers are causing kovat 19 it's
that's great such a great thing and and
so many people like oh yeah oh wow and I
literally heard someone say well maybe
maybe the 5g causes the corona virus and
then they spread it to other countries
like oh god you don't even understand
viruses yes
well part of the process but you know
that was accused with 4G and 3G and you
know cell phones back in the late 90s
and early 2000 there was the scare about
you know holding the phone up to you and
we all started doing that and that this
is maybe causing brain tumors and yeah
of course you can you can find anecdotes
you know this guy spent a lot of time is
cell phone you got a brain tumor over
here on his left temporal lobe or
whatever the problem is well what about
the hundreds of millions of people that
hold their cell phones up and they never
got brain cancer exactly and then
there's that the physical aspects of it
the the energy from the cell phone
itself or even these 5g towers is not
strong enough to break chemical bonds
like DNA to cause mutations in cells to
then become cancerous there's not a
physical mechanism a and B the counter
examples that you always have to what
about the countries that don't have 5g
okay yeah what about all the people that
you use use these things or stand or
live near self cell phone towers they
didn't get cancer and you know so you
have to look at you know all the
different options and our focus tends to
be on the one cell so I always use this
heuristic and for my class of teaching
skepticism is a two by two matrix where
you have four cells so I did this with
this there's this documentary film
coming out about horror films that are
haunted are cursed
horror films that are cursed so like you
know the the witch which is the one
where the actors died in the helicopter
act so The Twilight Zone the moon
and you know The Exorcist and these
other films where bet you know bad thing
things happen to the actors that are in
horror films okay the problem with that
is you're only focusing on one cell that
is horror films that are cursed what
then there's horror films that are not
cursed nothing bad happened to the
actors in those and then there's non
horror films regular films which bad
things happened to the actors and then
non horror films that are not cursed
right so when we just focus on the one
cell it's easy to find examples that fit
it but something like The Shining which
is a super or scary film you know
nothing bad happened to the actors and
or just take some other film like The
Godfather with whatever that's not a
horror film and nothing bad happen to
the actors and so on so when you look at
all the different options this is just a
way to think about any particular claim
that then there's really nothing left to
explain because you're just you're just
plucking out anecdotes we love
incidences they really really love
coincidence they're fun because they
love to believe in spiritual connections
and they love to believe in clairvoyance
and they love to believe in haunted
things Jamie pulled up the article it's
actually in the Sun says Bill Gates
break silence on Epstein admitting he
made a mistake in judgment by meeting
with the pedo tycoon it says so there's
no story story about it who knows but
he's he is quoted in there
yeah I don't know i i i i know i mean
there's i know some scientists write
that yeah because he was he had a way of
attracting famous scientists because he
had a lot of money and he said look i
can fund your lab help help find your
lab to the tune of millions of dollars
you know it's hard to resist that and
then maybe you go down that road a
little bit and then you start hearing
these rumors about his personal life and
you're like no yeah but the money's good
for the lab and you know you know
somewhere down the line it becomes
obvious it was a bad thing and it but
it's too late you already went down that
road so that you know it's hard to judge
people after the fact and hindsight bias
you know we look back and go how could
anybody have ever had any association
with them it's like yeah but that's you
know we know we know stuff now that
maybe not everybody knew the extent of
it back years ago now
why this book that you wrote giving the
devil is do the the idea is talking to
people whose opinions you disagree with
and that there's a lot of value in that
why did you write that and what were you
trying to get out of this well in
general I've been kind of a civil
libertarian most of my life in that
respect but but I it to be honest I was
kind of inspired after the episode we
did of your podcast with Graham Hancock
and I've since gotten to know him and I
thought you know I I was not really fair
to that guy I really didn't give him a
fair shake and there's value in people
like him who challenged the mainstream
now it's not that Outsiders can't make
contributions they can and we generally
tend to be skeptical of outsiders
because they're mostly wrong most of the
time but so are scientists wrong about
most of their hypotheses so I I do think
if you apply the principles of free
speech as originally laid out by John
Stuart Mill in 1859 his book on Liberty
where he said okay look you might be
completely right but by listening to
somebody else it strengthens your own
arguments so like for example I have my
mostly pro-choice students watch ben
shapiro videos defending the pro-life
position on abortion because if they
can't articulate his position his
arguments and then debunk them then
their pro-life pro-choice position is
not all that strong kay that's the first
one second one you might be you might be
partially right and partially wrong and
by listening to somebody you disagree
with you improve your arguments or you
might be completely wrong and and then
you've you've had a opportunity to
change your mind but but more
importantly still if you silence people
you've refused to listen to them then
what what happens when you take up a
contrary position you come up with some
idea that goes against the grain and the
norms or worse laws are in place to
silence you now you've just given up
your opportunity to be heard because
you've previously endorsed the idea of
silencing people and and I don't just
mean legally like passing laws although
that's disturbing enough like in many
countries like Canada Austria Germany
Switzerland France Australia New Zealand
it's illegal to deny the Holocaust
by which I mean if you say well I think
1 million Jews died not six million
therefore I don't think the gas chambers
were used the way we think they were
therefore I don't think the Nazis had in
a an intentional plan to exterminate
European Jewry ok that's now illegal to
say that
and now I've debunked all those claims I
think they're completely wrong and even
if the people who claim it are
themselves anti-semites you know I know
it's in somebody's heart or minds but
you know let's assume the worst just for
the sake of our argument I would still
defend their right to say it because
let's say by analogy you know I'm in the
middle of a debate about how many Native
Americans died since Columbus came here
and now the figure is you know I don't
90 million 70 million 50 million you
know it's debatable but let's say I'm a
historian and I say I think it was 10
million and I think it was mostly by
germs not by guns and steel am i a
Holocaust denier and therefore I should
be silenced or worst jailed for my
illegal hate speech you know and so this
is why I wrote a letter to the judge in
David Irving's case in Austria David
Irving the notorious Holocaust denier in
England so he flew da Vienna from London
to give a speech at one of these kind of
far-right groups in a hotel somewhere
and he got flagged at the airport you
know they scanned the passport and boom
he's arrested and he was put on trial
and convicted and sent to jail not he
didn't even speak he was just going to
speak hmm and that so that essentially
is a thought crime and so even though I
completely disagree with their arguments
and I maybe I don't I don't even want to
like these guys because their attitudes
about Jews I don't like that but still I
would defend them so I would apply that
to pretty much anybody who's out there
like that because that's the only way we
can really improve how we think about
things to understand the truth about the
real world is to listen to people that
disagree with you those are the ones
that that the Second Amendment are the
First Amendment free speech in general
is for and I don't agree with that but
can I give you the counter-argument the
counter-argument particularly online is
that people develop these bubbles they
develop these bubbles where you there's
everyone agrees with your perspective
you isolate yourself
in these bubbles and you know there's
this theory that you can indoctrinate
young impressionable people into hateful
or racist or you know ideologically
disturbing ideas by finding them
isolated in these thought bubbles if
they they get on to particular message
boards or a particular website where
they subscribe to a YouTube channel or
some video channel then they all meet up
in the comments and they agree with each
other but they're all wrong but they can
find confirmation bias in these these
large groups of people that are also
wrong and they feed off of each other
what do you what do you think about that
it does happen for sure and you know my
my first response is to encourage people
to get out of their bubble so if you
read the New York Times you should read
the Wall Street Journal and vice versa
now of course that doesn't apply to most
people online but there's new research
now since the 2016 election by a number
of political scientists and cognitive
scientists nicely summarized in Hugo
Mercier's book called not born yesterday
and he shows that those those Facebook
online bubbles against Hillary say or
for Trump or vice versa probably had
next to no effect on the actual election
that is to say if you believe that
Hillary Clinton was running a pedophile
ring out of a pizzeria it whether you're
whether I convinced you that that's not
true you're very likely not gonna vote
for Hillary no matter what right
somebody that believes that it's already
so far down the rabbit hole of say down
the spectrum of where they are
politically they're never gonna switch
positions and even the idea of just sort
of slightly negative stories about
Hillary or slightly negative stories
about Trump that might nudge people it
doesn't look like it had much effect at
all like Hugo shows that what most
political advertising is a complete
waste of money it does nothing doesn't
change people's votes all's it does is
reinforce to your team say in the
primaries that you're the best candidate
so it might work for that but in terms
of getting Republicans to vote you know
say centrist or Republicans to vote
Democrat you know that the advertising
probably have no no no effect at all and
the same thing with
corporate advertising and things like
that probably doesn't really work and so
I've been thinking about this with the
Nazis because I've written a lot about
that you know how do you the problem to
explain is how do you convert a an
entire nation of people from this you
know highly cultured educated
intelligent you know Western
civilization leading culture into Nazis
that are willing to exterminate Jews and
and other people and the answer I think
is now you don't you have to you don't
have to most of them didn't endorse the
Nazi ideology they like some of them
economic policies in the 30s that got
Germany out of the depression you know
Hitler had that you know built the
Autobahn and you know all that stuff
trains ran on time whatnot but
the extermination is ideology that the
Nazis had most Germans did not go that
far now the anti-semitism was rampant in
Europe including Germany in Poland and
Russia especially but most of the people
that held anti-semitic views about Jews
we're not extermination estate the Jew
should be hauled out and sent to camps
and exterminating that was very much a
Hitlerian thing so I've not gotten to
the point where I think no Hitler no
Holocaust probably even no Hitler no
World War two most German people did not
want war they were you know begging him
to stop after he annexed Austria for
example it's like that's enough at some
point these other countries are gonna go
to war with us and we don't want that
but you know Hitler so the way the state
the way this thing hovers in midair for
thirteen years in that case was was
pluralistic ignorance or the spiral of
silence where everybody thinks everybody
else thinks something but they don't and
then the punishment of dissenters anyone
who descends a descents who speaks out
either in the press or just privately
we're going to jail them silence them
censor them you know send them off to
camps or whatever so the KL system in
Germany and the gulag system in Soviet
Stalinist Russia silence people who
would have dissented that would tell the
rest of us who think everybody else
thinks this is the way everybody
believes but they don't we'll never know
because we don't hear those voices their
silence so so with those two things
pluralistic ignorance and the punishment
of dissenters you can have the
Nazi ideology or Stalinist ideology
hover in midair even though no one
really believes it it's just think of
like North Korea where when Kim Jong
Un's father died Kim jong-il and you
know you saw those videos of people just
weeping in the streets for days on end
you know most of these women it's like
who actually believes that they feel
this way well you know we don't believe
it
they are obviously faking does the
regime believe that they are you know in
mourning over the loss of the Dear
Leader no because they maintained the
concentration camp system and they
locked everybody up who descends even a
little bit that tells us they don't
actually believe people feel that way
about their regime so they didn't care
people believed they just wanted
compliance right they wanted to make
sure that people I mean they had a long
period of time where they force people
do mourn they wanted them to weep in the
streets and they jailed people for as
much as six months for not mourning
enough that's crazy
but that's just that's how you run a
dictatorship right under fear this is a
story of what where Stalin gave a speech
and then you know got a standing ovation
that went on for like three minutes and
then six minutes and eight minutes nine
minutes ten minutes 11 minutes
everybody's going oh crap please
somebody sit down finally some
apparatchik sat down and he was promptly
arrested the next day and sent off to
the gulag really yeah Wow 11 minutes not
enough now it's not just him they want a
silence of course it's a signal of
course is what happens if you don't you
know maintain this this charade we all
know isn't that that is an issue with
social media right I mean there's
there's people that are writing hateful
things on social media but then there's
people that are writing things that just
disagreeable and when they get silenced
this is oftentimes something that sends
a signal to other people to not say
disagreeable things not say questionable
things not say things that that is
contrary to the orthodoxy right that's
right so even though we we don't have
censorship laws like other countries
we've been discussing there is this
self-censorship that happens out of fear
of being cancelled
in the so called cancel culture or just
squelch by the you know the language
police the correct police alright so
when I ask a show of hands on my
students every semester how many of you
self censor that is you you want to say
something but you don't on abortion or
immigration or any kind of politically
charged issue they all raise their hand
oh yeah everyone I would never you know
say something not just in class but you
know in the dorm rooms or just wherever
students are gathering
that's the chilling effect that's what I
so giving the devil is do is you know
it's pushing back against that that I
know you don't want to give your devil
the your devil's whoever the devil is
whoever you disagree with right I know
you don't want to I don't want to either
but you know but we have to for our own
safety sake if I want to be heard and I
want you to take me seriously and listen
to what I have to say I have to respond
in kind I have to practice the principle
of the kind of reciprocity or
interchangeable perspectives I have to
see it from your perspective well he
wants to have his voice oh so do i yeah
and so as a principle it's it doesn't
feel intuitive like no I don't want to
give everybody a voice but you know what
I'm gonna override that impulse and do
it anyway if nothing else selfishly for
my own safety sakes of my other case
chapter in the book besides Graham
Hancock is Jordan Peterson now you know
after I saw him on your show and then I
saw him getting hammered in the media
especially you know online I'm just
viciously attacked it's like God who is
this guy anyway that I met him and got
to know him a little bit it's like he's
not at all like with these pieces
wonderful guy he's the most
misrepresented person I've ever met in
my life
willfully willingly misrepresented they
do it on purpose they know what they're
doing they want to paint him out with
just series of very quick easy to use
adjectives that turn him into a monster
yeah and and they don't have anything to
back that up anything and it's it's
really strange it's so disturbing but
it's a very strange left-wing
characteristic and again this is coming
from someone who's on the left yes but
it is a left-wing characteristic this
this need to misrepresent someone paint
them in a strawman fashion as some sort
of an evil person so that you can
dismiss everything they say
that is uncomfortable or that is
contrary to your accepted ideology the
ideology that you subscribe to and that
you're defending and that you've
identified with and I think this is a
real problem a real problem that we're
having is that people identify with
their ideas if their ideas fall apart
somehow or another they're falling apart
they are a part of the ideas they're not
just a person who has a thought and they
can like if you and I disagreed on
something I would hope that we could
just talk about these ideas as if they
are separate from us but oftentimes
that's not the case oftentimes people
they so identify with those ideas that
when those ideas are challenged they are
challenged they get emotional they get
angry and they will lie
they will willfully misrepresent you in
order to strengthen their position and
this is a terrible terrible thing that I
see and I see it so much from my side I
see so much of this from the left and
it's so discouraging and it's so
infuriating and this is one of the
things that I love about the concept of
your book and I love about this idea
that we need open discourse and
discussion and I think we're dealing
with a couple of things here and one of
the things I think we're dealing with is
the limited kind of communication that's
available through social media it's very
limited you know the writing something
in text is someone responds in text
we're missing on so much nuance we're
missing so much of what it means to
interact with someone socially if you
and I are sitting across from each other
person to person if I say something
insulting to you I have to see you get
upset I have to feel it I have to look
at you I have to feel like what kind of
an asshole am i that I said that to you
like why did I hurt your feelings like
there's all these things that happen
when people are interacting with each
other socially looking at each other in
the eye these cues these this is what
made us human this is what I mean this
is what what found community I mean this
is this is one of the basic tenets of
rational discourse is the ability to
communicate with each other in a
comprehensive way in a nuanced way and
so much of that is it
eliminated entirely when you put things
into 140 or 280 characters yeah yeah
I'll occasionally get really nasty
letters somebody email me and I mean
really nasty like you're a piece of shit
you fucking just on and on like this and
I'll sometimes I'll write them back and
go hey you know are you having a hard
day cuz you know III didn't mean to be
offensive I was just trying to make this
way and they always write back oh my god
I'm so sorry I didn't know anybody who's
gonna respond oh wow
yeah no I take it back that what you're
just saying is so common I hear that
from so many people that are in the
public eye that say something back to
someone who says something rude to them
and the person sort of like well I
didn't mean it because it's just a
shitty way to communicate sending
someone an email or writing a blog about
someone or tweeting some nasty shit
about someone it's a terrible way to
communicate it's such a one-way you know
it's a it's a very limited way to
communicate it's a far inferior to
actual person-to-person and
communication so my chapter on Jordan
you know I present his views and they go
here's where I agree with him here's
where I disagree with them and to his
credit I I sent him a copy of the
chapter and I said would you blurb my
book and and he did he write me that's
that nice long blurb yeah and he says
this is a rather difficult book for me
to blurb given that the entire and
entire chapters devoted to criticizing
my claims about pragmatic truth visa vie
scientific truth however and then he
says nice things about so to his credit
you know you know this guy I disagree
with me but dang it you know at least
he's willing to talk to me he's a great
guy people just don't know him they just
don't know him I love that guy and I've
had people say you know like what kind
of a piece of shit are you for
platforming people like Jordan Peterson
I'm like my god if you went to dinner
with him just sit down at dinner with
him and me and you would realize what a
great guy he is he's a great person he
really is a very great person
he's just misrepresented and and he's
become this lightning rod for hate from
the left and you know man I don't even
think he's really
right wing he thinks of himself as a
classical liberal which is a very weird
definition and it's more of a centrist
than anything but he's not right yeah no
no definitely not the problem you
identified though just a moment ago was
that if people identify with their
beliefs that is that the the the
specific say political platforms like an
immigration abortion you know civil
rights whatever though those are sort of
secondary to the deeper core moral
values that people hold I define myself
as a liberal I define myself as a
conservative Republican whatever and so
when you attack one little thing here
well you know I agree with you on this
this but you know on the abortion thing
I think you're wrong and here's why you
know the the impulse is well but if I
give if I gave up on that one then I'm
gonna lose all these other ones and then
I've given up my identity right so like
when I used to debate creationist
intelligent design theorists and so on
you know I could tell that you know if I
give people a choice like you have to
choose between Jesus and Darwin for your
life you know they're not picking Darwin
okay because you know the this sort of
belief in their you know Christian
dogmas about Jesus that is their core
being who cares about Darwin and you
know whoever this scientist was but if I
say keep Jesus keep your whole religion
I don't care what you believe but the
science is really good on this and
here's why you should follow the facts
and you don't have to give up anything
for it and it's like oh okay I'll listen
right so and like with more recently
with climate change you know most people
most of us don't know much about climate
science it's a technical science the
models are super complex people send me
these papers I don't really understand
them you know but but if you
self-identify say as a conservative then
climate change is just a proxy for
something else like I believe in free
markets and free enterprise and I'm
pro-business and those guys over there
you know they want to attack that now
unfortunately Al Gore's success with his
film and books and so forth then
affiliated climate science with a
left-wing liberal cause therefore
conservatives have to go against it even
though neither side knows all that much
about claim
science it's become something else that
you identify yourself is so we have to
take that out of the formula like you
keep your worldview that you define
yourself as don't give up that but just
follow the facts on these specific
issues yeah the the polarization is the
the thing it's right there's if you are
on one side you have to subscribe to the
whole menu of ideas and if you like if
you're left-wing you can't really be
pro-life you know and if you're if your
right-wing you're supposed to have a
certain amount skepticism about climate
change right so when somebody publicly
signals where they stand on say climate
change well what they're really saying
is look i'm i am publicly declaring my
commitment to my team yes right that's a
problem the virtue signaling that the
the these saying I have loyalty to this
position because of this is my tribe
that that's right and and so a lot of
cognitive science studies of reasoning
shows that we we generally don't reason
toward finding the truth but defending
positions that are part of our team
ideology or sort of collective whole and
in this case we've been talking about
left and right but you know there's
there's religious side or economic
ideologies and so on that are part of
that and so even if you don't know
anything about it it's a virtue signal
that I'm in that team and you know okay
fine we're all on teams that's that's
fine defend your team but you know what
I try to do in the book is disentangle
the specific issues let's just take them
one by one like why can't I be
personally against abortion I don't want
to do that but I and I recognize they
been Shapiro's arguments for the rights
of the fetus but I also think we have
conflicting moral values there they're
the rights of a woman and and the
history of the way women have been
treated and men have always tried to
lorded order over women's reproductive
choices historically and this has always
led to bad things like infanticide and
back-alley abortions and so on so I got
an air on one side or the other you know
I recognize and acknowledge your
arguments are really good ban or whoever
is a pro-lifer but I still hold this
position I think there's
a lot of progress that can be made
socially to kind of reduce the tension
when you say I acknowledge your position
I understand it you know steel Manning
the argument and then the person on the
other side feels like well at least this
guy's listening to me yeah well I think
that so that is the best topic when it
comes to that because it's when you get
to particularly we get to late term
abortions boy that's a very hard thing
to defend morally and ethically and it's
also one of the things about the
abortion topic is that it's so uniquely
human in that it's such a messy topic
it's not there's not like here's a clear
one don't murder people right don't just
go up to people and murder and
everyone's like yeah yeah that's clean
that's that's a that's a clean subject
abortion is not that clean like when is
it okay is it okay when the fetus is not
a fetus when it's just a bundle of cells
most people are like yeah well it's not
it's not really anything then well it
will become a person though when when do
we decide well that's such a messy
subject and it's such a human subject
and I like you I am on the side of
pro-choice and I think that it is the
woman's choice to decide whether or not
she wants to keep the baby but I also
recognize that a certain point in time
that choice becomes very different the
choice becomes very different when
there's a six month old fetus like what
is what are we saying there if you if
you are just I am pro-choice period okay
are you pro-choice up until the day of
birth like Wendy back it off when do you
back it off and it it is a subject that
people do not want to breach they don't
want to touch it and particularly
particularly people on the left when it
comes to deciding when it's okay when
it's not okay because they feel like
this is angling towards an elimination
of a woman's right to choose and it
angles towards this this very difficult
conversation where you recognize that
there is a difference between someone
who's 7 months pregnant and someone
who's 7 days pregnant there's a very
very big difference and if we can't
acknowledge that then we are being
tribal we're being ideal
Driven we're sticking to our position
because we feel like if we concede that
this is a complex issue then we open up
the door to possibly losing a woman's
right to choose and losing these
reproductive rights yeah I think part of
the problem also is that we tend to
dichotomize most moral issues is right
or wrong good or evil and and the
problem is that the law has to draw the
line somewhere we have to have a law and
to get along and so forth so we have to
say the drinking age is this instead of
that or driving age is this and you know
the point of what you can have abortion
is right here but most most of life is
much more on a spectrum a continuum so
here I make the distinction in the book
between binary thinking and continuous
thinking most moral issues are on a
continuum
you know like immigration you know it's
like close the borders what don't let
anybody in ever no no no we gotta let
some in okay then we should open the
borders you mean you want to just open
the borders up and let everybody in no
no no I'm not saying everybody okay
where do you draw the line right and
it's another messy human subject yeah
yeah but but if you think of it like
well it's a continuum instead of a
binary choice and you know whatever
answer it's not just right or wrong good
or evil that there's you know different
places to set the the the dial so
something you know and here you know the
comparative method of looking at what
different countries do as experiments
thinking of those as experiments like
that you know Japan has a very tight you
know they've slid it way down here they
let almost nobody in Australia is a
little looser but but but tighter than
us and so on you kind of look at the
consequences of letting this many people
in or that many people and see what it
does of course all countries are
different some are more diverse some are
more homogeneous you have to account for
that and on and on so here I think you
know instead of thinking of it in these
kind of polarized black-and-white you
know it's either this or that and if
you're on this side then you're on the
bad side you know that that's not
helpful
so instead of binary thinking continuous
thinking abortion certainly you just
articulated it perfectly I mean seven
days oh come on you know it's it's just
a bundle of cells but now looks like you
know by twenty weeks or so you'll pain
you know the some consciousness comes
online you know around 24 weeks 25 weeks
you know at some point you got to draw
the line somewhere around there now
scientists of course they don't want put
lines anywhere it's it's a day-by-day
week-by-week day by day even hour by
hour the development of the connectome
that creates thought and so on there's
no good place but we have to have a line
somewhere so the law has to do that but
that then forces us into that binary
thinking which is not helpful and it it
creates this this is like the line in
the sand this polarization line between
these two sides and I think that so much
of what people subscribe to when they do
choose an ideology once they choose an
ideology they they have this
conglomeration of ideas that they adopt
and they adopt in order to be accepted
by the tribe and it's this is also a
very unique aspect of human
communication and civilization that we
we have to adhere to the principles and
the ideologies of that tribe so you just
take on all these thoughts and it's one
of the real problems with only having
two choices in this country when it
comes to politics and when it comes to
just styles of life you know and there's
so many people that take great relish in
switching teams too which is interesting
right it's like I was a liberal my whole
life and then one day I woke up and
realized I was being a moron you know
now I'm a pro second ammendment
pro-trump Magga make America great Keep
America great it's interesting because
those are sometimes the most the the
most passionate supporters of the new
side whether they're their newly liberal
or newly conservative or you know well
some of the people that are the most
interesting to talk to are people that
used to be vegans and they're now
carnivore they're just they just eat
meat and I was realized and I was being
a fool and like oh my god it's it's the
same thing it's with it's with almost
every style of living you can find a
contrary style that people find
appealing you know there's people that
used to be atheist to become Muslims and
they wear you know the hijab and they
they fully adhere to the Quran it's
really really interesting because
I spent a lot of time watching religious
scholars online talk and watching them
preach and watch and if there's
something and as a person who's very
agnostic when I watch that it's
appealing to me there's a certain aspect
of the confidence that they have when
they're talking about what God wants or
what you know what Allah has in store
for you when you die or what you should
do because it's written in this
particular religious text the confidence
that they have and they describe these
things is very alluring even to me it's
not like I'm going to join but I'm
sitting there in front of my computer
and I'm recognizing oh I see the appeal
here like it's not you know it's not
that it's working on me but it's
attractive to me I see it I see how this
works on people and I find it incredibly
fascinating and I think it has to it has
to have some sort of an evolutionary
reason there's some sort of an
evolutionary benefit that adhering and
being accepting of the morals and the
ethics and the ideology of the tribe is
that that's how you stay alive that's
how you find other like-minded people to
stick with you yeah I'm glad to do that
because that's really the only way to
figure out why people believe whatever
it is they believe yeah you know so
monitor your blood pressure when I say
this see it from Hitler's perspective
what well he had a perspective you know
their perspective was fueled by meth and
testosterone shops and you know cocaine
is dr. marell probably effective but
pretty oh my god I mean the the stories
of Hitler and Hitler's use of
recreational drugs in order to fuel his
escapades yeah there was that book about
that a couple years ago yeah but just
but just in general I mean a good Hitler
biography like by Ian Kershaw is the
definitive biography it's two massive
volumes each were like 600 pages long
I mean it really gives you insight what
he was thinking why he did what he did
with the why the people responded the
way they did and so on and but we should
be able to do that without someone
saying how can you take Hitler's
perspective but I just want to
understand you know why evil happens I
mean my my friend and colleague Roy
Baumeister wrote that great book on evil
in which he actually went and
interviewed serial killers and rapists
in prison and said you know why'd you do
it and you know he discovered that they
all had this perspective like well this
is why I did it I had a crappy childhood
or you know I I felt that you know that
it was totally justified that guy dissed
me or she cheated on me or they all had
justifications and it was kind of
interesting to see the rationalizations
behind their arguments now from the
victims perspective that the perpetrator
is just pure evil he did it because he
enjoys suffering the suffering of other
people now there are some you know
Psychopaths or Satanists that do that
but they're very small in number very
tiny percentage of the population most
people in prison that are killers are
what they did it for moralistic reasons
you know he took my parking spot so I
you know we got in a fight and then I
killed him or you know this guy slept
with my girlfriend and so I had to do
something and defend my honor and it one
thing led to another and Here I am in
prison they almost all have good
moralistic reasoning so the problem is
not that we don't have enough morality
actually we have too much morality too
much moralizing about other people that
are harming us so you know back to the
free speech issue the moment you say
we're gonna create a category called
hate speech okay what goes in that bin
right well you know it's so it's so I
documented that in the opening page that
this really begins the United States
with in 1919 with the Schenck versus the
United States decision by the United
States Supreme Court to uphold this
conviction of this guy named shank who
was head of the Socialist Party in
Philadelphia in 1918 he was distributing
flyers to draft aged men telling them
that the conscription is equivalent of
slavery because the 14th amendment
protects your right to bodily autonomy
and when the government says we're
drafting you into the military and we're
sending you to Europe this case for the
European Great War you know we now own
your body for the next four years okay
so this is what and so here's the famous
lines
Oliver Wendell Holmes Supreme Court
justice Oliver Wendell Holmes shank vs.
the United States that we're all
familiar with the most stringent
protection of free speech would not
protect a man in falsely shouting fire
in a theatre in causing a panic the
question in every case is whether the
words used are used in such
circumstances and are of such a nature
as to create a clear and present danger
that they will bring about the
substantive evils that Congress has a
white right to prevent it is a question
of proximity and degree so clear and
present danger okay so we you you might
say okay so somebody incites a group to
riot and cause violence or something
like that so that's going to be called
hate speech but but but note what what
he considered at the time a clear and
present danger protestors of the draft
and their argument their argument is
pretty reasonable you know I mean you
can disagree with it and say no I think
in times of national crisis we have to
abolish set aside the 14th Amendment and
conscript young men into the army and
send them off toward to potentially die
that's our right to do it to protect our
nation but we should be able to debate
that but the moment that happened in
1919 then category creep or category
expansion happened where more and more
things got put into the bin of clear and
present danger so you're now doing
something that I consider to be a clear
and present danger a threat to our
nation or state or community or whatever
so that category just got bigger and
bigger and then so back to why liberals
used to defend free speech and now it's
more conservatives doing it and liberals
in favor of censorship begins with this
idea of something like in the 60s where
we began to become sensitive to the
words we use to describe whether they're
people so the n-word you know describe
African Americans obviously the one we'd
all agree with yeah that's bad we
shouldn't do that okay what about the
c-word to describe women or called Jews
kikes or Vietnamese call them gooks or
whatever yeah yeah those are all hate
speech so the bin starts getting larger
and larger then all of a sudden you end
up with these lists of microaggressions
a reprint one in the book from UCLA the
University of California system and 2014
issued this long list of things you
can't say like where are you from or wow
you're good at math to someone who's not
Asian or wow you speak English
well you know and these are now
considered hate speech that they could
trigger people's feelings of being hurt
and that is a form of clear and present
danger to the sort of serenity of our
community and all of a sudden this
category is now huge is where are you
from really on that list
it yeah it is yeah yeah my wife gets
this all the time because she's from
Germany and she speaks perfect English
he has no accent and people go wow I
can't believe you speak English so well
or well I can't believe you're not from
America or something like that and she
instead of being offended she just says
thank you I paid attention in school but
it's just bizarre that where are you
from would be considered a
microaggression it's just we can't make
things so sensitive and this is one of
the things that I hope comes out of this
horrible tragedy that we're experiencing
is that people realize what actually is
important and we spend much less time
concentrating on stuff that's not really
important because there's no real
problems you know the one of the
problems with society being so good and
and this is arguably the best time ever
in human history and Pinker points to
that with statistics and gets criticized
like harshly criticized by people on the
left that say no it's not it's the best
time for white men and then they'll
start going crazy about all the things
that are wrong in the world and he's
saying like yeah no one's denying the
things that are wrong in the world
there's always been things wrong in the
world there are less things wrong in the
world today than ever before and one of
the reasons why people can get upset
about these things that many people
consider to be not that significant like
asking someone where are you from is
because there's no war there's no real
thing on our beaches there's no real
horrible tragedy that's taking place
every day in our communities you know I
had a friend my friend Shuki was from
Israel and I went over his house and
they would be playing bongos and
laughing and dancing and and and singing
and I'm like I go why I go wire Israelis
that come to America like why my guys so
fun like
like it's so they like they like
laughing and singing and he goes you
know in his crazy accent he was like hey
where I'm from he goes you could die any
day he goes so when you're alive it's
party party party and that was his take
on things he just wanted a party you
know he was a really fun loving guy
because he'd experienced some tragedy
and because he'd experienced this
horrific condition in the Middle East
whereas here in America when things get
better we find more shit that's not that
important to complain about the thinking
in a way it's a sign of moral progress
in as much as it used to be people would
protest really horrific inequalities yes
prejudices and bigotry against African
Americans and so on well we've improved
so much on that and I and I wish the
left would take more credit for that
because the Liberals were drivers of the
civil rights movement so when they now
say you know things are as bad as
they've ever been or worse than they've
ever been for for african-americans and
so on they're in a way they're saying
you know our our immediate ancestors who
supported these civil liberties they had
no effect at all Martin Luther King he
didn't do anything because look things
are just as bad as they were in King's
time that that's kind of conceding that
there's been no progress and therefore
there's no point in trying well it's
also this is statistically foolish
because it's inaccurate you know I mean
but we should be any force the positive
right of course
yes right right so but when you see like
a campus eruption at Yale over you know
the Halloween costumes business yeah
Nicholas Christakis you know I mean that
you know we all looked at that went oh
my god this is ridiculous but in a way
it's a sign of progress like the
students in the sixties used to you know
protest the Vietnam War or you know the
way blacks were treated in the south
those are you know those are really
legitimate things to complain about in
protest about but there there aren't as
many of those around anymore for
students to get all riled up about and
they still have those moral impulses
like I want to promote what's right and
I want to be against evil and I'm all
fired up here with my my moral module
dialed up to 11 and I'm going to go out
on the streets what am I
protests those Halloween costumes you
know people that cultural appropriation
yeah and so on remember there was a tell
the story in a book about this Taco
Tuesday at Cal State Fullerton I was
invited to give a speech there years ago
about protecting free speech over this
issue that caused the campus to just
erupt and in protest about Taco Tuesday
it's like Taco Tuesday
yeah that's cultural appropriation you
know the Mexican community is being
appropriated by these whites eating
tacos like we're in Southern California
where is there no tacos I mean this is
you know the guy who tried to patent
Taco Tuesday LeBron James LeBron Jay did
a Jamie isn't that what happened yeah he
talks about Taco Tuesday on his
Instagram I was on his Instagram and
he's like you know what today is and
then he shows his talk Taco Tuesday you
know okay what is he allowed to do it I
mean the whole thing is preposterous
it's delicious food you know it's not
like we're saying that you know white
people created it or anything like that
I mean and cultural appropriation is so
ridiculous in so many ways but one of
the most ridiculous ways it is is that
it prevents people from enjoying some
amazing aspects of the diverse cultures
that we all coexist with especially here
in America I mean this is such a
legitimate melting pot I think it's
amazing that you can go to all these
different places and that you know
there's a guy I'm trying to remember his
name Rick Bayless I believe his name is
and he's a famous Mexican chef but he's
not Mexican but he cooks Mexican food
and he loves Mexican cuisine he takes
all these trips to Mexico to learn with
the Mexican masters and he has a famous
restaurant in Chicago where he has a
full authentic Mexican menu and people
were furious at him because here he is
this white guy selling Mexican food like
what do you expect him to do like do you
have to be born a certain patch of dirt
to enjoy a style of food and don't you
think that he is actually boosting the
signal and letting people know that
there's
amazing things that come out of Mexico
this is an homage to Mexican cuisine
he's not trying to claim it but you know
hey this was invented in Chicago you
know this is not really Mexican oh he's
he's saying this is from Mexico he talks
openly about the various parts of the
country of Mexico where this style of
cooking came from and and you know and
how it emanates and from the the
traditional ingredients and he cooks
them in traditional ways and fantastic
like really widely praised restaurant
with amazing food and this guy gets shit
on for it it's it's crazy this is not
only these perverse reversals because it
used to be like in the 19th century
there was this idea of kind of a pure
European culture and other cultures were
somehow not as good and they defined
culture in a very specific way and and
then you know kind of liberals then
we're pushing back against that say no
no the you know the cultures are equal
and culture is a whole blend of of
different you know migrations and people
mixing and that's what culture that's
what makes cultural rich it's yes it's
fluid and changing and so on and now all
of a sudden liberals are saying no no
there's a pure correct culture that only
the people born there can use you know
it adopt those cultural features that's
the complete opposite of what liberals
used to argue yes starting with
anthropologists say no no no this crazy
idea that whites and whites a from mrs.
heaven I view our European cultures
bunch of nonsense
Europeans are just as amalgamated with
lots of different cultures as anybody
else there is no real European culture
yeah it's it's a weird time and I again
I connect this to the fact that we
didn't have as many real problems as we
used to and when you talk about Yale
with Nic Christakis I think there's this
thing that kids do when they're coming
of age they're separated from their
parents and they want to establish that
so many of these older people were wrong
about the way life is and they're wrong
and we're gonna show them what's right
and we have a new way of living we have
a new way of thinking and we want this
campus to be safe we want safe spaces
and and a lot of it is about taking
control of their environment and
enforcing their ideology and
creating something that's in a lot of
ways is very ego driven because they're
trying to show that they're making a
change in the environment around them
and they have good intentions while
they're doing it it's just their brains
haven't fully formed yet and they don't
have a lot of life experience and this
pattern this pattern shows itself over
and over and over again it's a
constantly repeating pattern where these
kids go away to college and become self
righteous and then try to impose their
viewpoints on the older people it's very
very common and it has this these
psychological building blocks to it that
you can kind of see why they're doing
this yeah me if you want a safe space go
to a college campus these are about the
safest environment you could be in in
all of America which itself is safer
than it's ever been at Chapman
University we have a we have a safe
space group and so I went to one of
their meetings once just to see what it
was all about this is mostly LGBTQ
people that you know we're kind of
concerned about being insulted in or
assaulted and so anyway so I said well
how many incidences have there been on
this very white very pleasant campus
here in Orange County well we don't have
any numbers because we're not allowed to
ask and keep track of how many
incidences there are now the police can
do this but this this safe space group
or the administration can't do that so
well then how do you know it's worse
than it was say five years ago or it's
the same or it's better well we don't
know nice I could give me some examples
what are we talking about here what's
what's the issues and like one of them
was for example a gay couple work I
think it was two guys walking along a
sidewalk and now chapman's is in the
middle of the city of orange so it's
ringed with houses and just the regular
city so some kind of pickup truck drove
by and said something like fucking
faggots and I said okay yeah that guy's
a dick he's an asshole
so what are you gonna do now I mean is I
are you gonna give the power to that guy
in the pickup truck in which now you see
yourself as a victim now technically
yeah you're a victim of a sort of a hate
crime or whatever you know he said
something nasty but then what you know
why not just say fuck
asshole or don't say anything just
ignore it and just move on with your
life because there will always be
assholes yeah there are fewer assholes
than there used to be as I like to say
conservatives are more liberal now than
liberals were in the 1950s you know
we've all had our consciousness raise
the morale sphere is expanded and so on
that's a very good point we just said
that conservatives are more liberal
today than liberals were in the 1950s
socially just think about that I mean it
used to be where even most liberals were
against gay marriage say for example
until 2011 really the switch began and
then 2015 it changed completely with
Supreme Court decision but if you look
at interracial marriage that was illegal
until 1967 and pretty much most
Americans including liberals were
against it now conservatives are all in
no one objects to interracial marriage
by conservatives they've all shifted in
that liberal direction and I think the
gay marriage thing I think that's pretty
much fallen off the radar of anybody's
discussions after the cake baker
incident in Colorado
I think you know I think nobody's really
talking about that anymore
you know gay marriage you know it's like
the Seinfeld episode yeah you know
whatever dude who cares I mean not that
there's anything wrong with that you
know and it's become kind of just a
Seinfeld level joke now and I think
pollsters won't even ask that question
anymore you know are you in favor or
against gay marriage in a couple more
years it'll just fall off our social
radar not totally though remember when
Pete Budaj edge was running for
president before he had dropped out
there was this one woman that found out
that he was married to a man and she
tried to take back or vote oh no I
didn't hear but oh it's a crazy video
it's a crazy video to watch this this
you know I pity her that first of all I
pity her that she cares that she's
developed and then she's developed this
ideology or she's been subjected to this
ideology that she thinks for something
wrong with two gay people that that are
married but she was like no way I'm not
there's no way and she was trying to
take her her vote back she didn't know
she's like I didn't know he was gay and
she was upset by it
yeah I mean they're out there there's a
few
I would say this would be in the my
category of there's always going to be a
few assholes driving around in their
pickup truck same fuckin faggots and you
know what do you do about it again just
you know you can't give those kind of
people that power over you well this I
feel pity for them it's it's sad it's
sad that someone would care it really is
sad that you would care about someone
sexual preference or any of those things
right and as a comedian it's it's a real
pain in the ass because you can't even
make fun of gay people you can't make
fun of anything that gay people do
that's legitimately funny because it'd
be considered hateful but all for all
people are funny like people are funny
and you should be able to make fun of
all of us we're all we're so silly we're
the weirdest thing on this planet is as
far as I could see in terms of like how
complex we are a health suit and some
gay people are funny they do they do
funny things but if you make fun of them
it's a it's in our world today it's
considered homophobic you know I just
think that's it's so crazy coming from a
person who's not even remotely
homophobic I've been called homophobic
because I've made fun of certain things
that gay people do that I think are
silly again a perverse reversal the way
used to be you know liberals were always
in favor of comedians poking at the
power structure and the prejudices of
Verta well Danny Bruce the thing is it's
it's punching down now the idea is that
you're punching down on people that are
maligned and you know people that are
they find themselves in a position in
society where many people on the Left
consider them a protected class but my
position is we're all okay everyone's
fine but we all have our own
idiosyncrasies and our own behavior
patterns and are all things that are
pretty fucking funny there's a lot of a
lot of humor to it but we with love you
know that all of this is with love that
even making fun of Boys Town and how
raucous it is on a Saturday night it
doesn't mean you hate gay people it's an
observation I mean it's a fucking
fantastic place to be if you're a young
gay guy looking to get laid but it's a
hilarious place to be if you're a
straight person driving through it
doesn't mean you hate anyone right and
right the problem is that those people
like the guy in the pickup truck yelling
the slurs to make people feel bad those
people still exist that's the problem
yeah but my point is not as many not as
many much better much better yeah and
the denial of that it seems silly yeah
exactly because it denies that we made
moral progress sample like dr. King and
the other civil rights leaders didn't
have any effect and that that's not
first of all it's wrong they didn't have
an effect we've made a lot of progress
but also manure about is that it's going
to tell younger people today don't
bother trying because nothing ever
changes right yeah there's definitely
some of that you know it would be great
if all of the hate went away it would be
great if there was no prejudice no
racism no sexism no homophobia none of
those things but one of the things about
when you see someone acting foolish in a
way that is discriminatory one of the
things about it is you recognize that
this is a pattern of behavior that human
beings can fall into and it's some of
the worst aspects of tribal behavior and
recognizing the folly of others is very
beneficial to your own personal growth
you could realize how how grow if you're
there when you see someone yell out a
full slur to a gay couple you can it's
terrible that it happens but you can
experience how stupid that person has to
be and how sad it is that those people
exist and recognize that okay this is
what it's like to be these people this
is what it's like and the this this it's
like when you see people making mistakes
and doing terrible things and doing dumb
things the good thing about it is you
can learn from other people's foolish
thoughts
yeah well research shows that when you
know somebody say who's gay you're less
likely to be homophobic just the
exposure to them and so the effect part
of the effective cause of moral progress
is bottom-up now sometimes you have to
pass laws to get people to change like
to abolish slavery in the United States
we needed a war
and 750,000 people died about that and
you know sometimes you have to send into
federal troops like I think it was
Eisenhower did that to desegregate
Alabama schools that were segregated and
you remember the governor said you know
segregation now segregation tomorrow
segregation forever and I forget who was
president the time he said no you're
segregating and we're sending that we're
you're integrating your schools and
we're sending in federal troops men with
guns to make sure you do it okay
sometimes you have to do that but most
of the change happens from the bottom up
of just oppressed peoples saying you
know what stop that don't do that I
don't like it when you say that you know
and it began with the n-word and just
kept expanding so there's a logic to
where we ended up today where you have
this big bin of you know
microaggressions and so on but there was
a logic to it like just saying it's
hurtful to do that and most of the
effects have been good they have been
positive just you know when Ellen comes
out on our TV show that's just a little
thing there or or when South Park you
know makes fun of all different
religions you know that it's perspective
on things humor is good television
scripts movie scripts the way characters
talked Richard Dawkins makes this point
about you could pinpoint to the decade
when a novel was written based on the
words that are used to describe Jews
blacks and women and you know but but no
one said okay we're gonna pass laws to
say you can't use these words to
describe Jews blacks and women we all
just change the way we talk about other
people in a way that's more liberal
that's more all-encompassing that's more
egalitarian in that sense and and it's
not clear how exactly that happened just
incrementally a little bit by bit you
know it's just it's like trying to
figure out when a word starting to be
used it's like it's really hard to 9/11
or gays and I remember in the late 90s
there was a couple of atheists that
wanted to quit using the word atheist
atheists and call us the brights we are
the brights and that didn't stick yeah
it was pretty obvious what the you know
what the antonym did the brights were
the people that believed in god they're
the dims right okay so the shims are not
gonna be fond of that
so that never took off you know by by
trying to change language by Fiat from
the top down okay here's the new rule
we're all going to use this word that
doesn't work it's just expanding our
consciousness expanding the moral sphere
it just including more people in your
honorary circle of friends and family
members or honorary family members or
people that you will treat with respect
that that has been happening just tiny
bits every day a little bit here and
there and over the decades you see it
when you look back at the numbers like
Steve Pinker does but but it's hard to
pinpoint the day that that happened
do you know Daryl Davis's yes the LA
sheriff right no no no no he is this man
right here he's a blues musician and he
is he's converted over 200 KKK members
and Nazis and that guy yes I talked to
him on the podcast he's an amazing guy
and it all came up from him doing a show
and talking to a guy who said I I've
never had a drink with a black man
before and he's like how is that
possible and the guy said I'm in the KKK
he thought the guy was joking and then
the guy pulls out his card and he's like
why and so he tells this guy hey here's
my phone number when I'm in town again
I'll be in town again let's sit down and
have a conversation so the guy comes to
see him again when he's in town he
strikes up a friendship with this guy
and four months later this guy hands him
his rope and he says I'm leaving I'm
leaving and this guy was like a Grand
Wizard of the KKK
he said I'm stepping down and he's had
that effect on 200 people and done it on
a person-to-person based because he's
such first of all he's an incredibly
articulate guy he's very intelligent and
probably more articulate and intelligent
to the people that he's talking to who
considered themselves superior so they
talked to him over a long period of time
and they realized like this guy's so
well read and he's so fucking smart like
I'm dumber than him and I'm a white guy
what is wrong eventually wind up giving
upon their racism and they're friends
with him now and they it was more
important to them to be friends with him
and continue their friendship with him
than it was for them to stay in the KKK
and he's had you know these guys who
were like henchmen for the KKK quit give
it up and become his friend and he he
brought in all these robes that these
guys have given him including like Nazi
flags that they gave them then the
band's a rant where around there their
sleeves and Nazi uniforms and and it's
amazing but it's that one-on-one thing
that you were talking about you're less
likely to be homophobic if you know a
gay person and you like them you're like
well that's crazy they're just people
you're less likely to be racist if
you're around black people and you meet
them and you you get to know them you're
like well we'll just for just people but
just people who look different that's it
right that's it it's right isn't that
that movie KK Klan or the Spike Lee
movie isn't it about this guy Davis oh I
don't know I don't just trying to
remember I don't think maybe it was
somebody else yeah yeah I don't think
there's a movie made about him I mean it
should be he's just doing it like old
school would door to door I mean he's
really doing it you know what is uh was
that you know that what does that term
when someone does it from the bottom up
I mean that's that's really what he's
doing he's like grassroots
yeah grassroots thank you that's really
what he's doing like grassroots
converting people that were racist to
realize the error of their ways there is
some evidence still preliminary that
reading novels makes you better at mind
reading that is reading the minds of
other people what's called theory of
mind that is you can put yourself in
somebody else's shoes and see the world
through their eyes and the idea is that
it by reading novels you transport your
point of view into the character that
you're identifying with in the novel and
then you see the world through their
eyes and so the way this is tested is
they measure the kinds of things that
people read or they actually have them
read passages like from a Jane Austen
novel and and then they take this
this I tell this test where you look at
just a block of ice like I would show
you a picture of just this we can kind
of see the way my my the corner my eyes
is squinting or not or whatever what the
emotions are and they have like six
different emotions and then you have to
guess what the emotion is of this
picture you're looking at hundreds of
them you go through and anyway the
correlation was that people that read a
lot of novels or that you know that kind
of fiction that that has that
interchangeable perspective are better
at mind-reading they're better at
reading emotions in the eyes anyway a
lot of this hasn't been replicated yet
but it's kind of new but still the idea
is that the rise of the novel in since
the Enlightenment in which just common
people become more literate in literacy
rates were going up over the centuries
it used to be like 10% of the population
was literate now it's you know 99%
whatever so there's a curve going up
there so as people start reading more
and then they start reading novels they
start taking the perspective of others
so you know here Harriet Beecher Stowe's
Uncle Tom's Cabin was the first time
most White's had ever read anything
about what it was like to be a slave and
they were horrified like oh my god had
no idea that this is what it's like and
Abraham Lincoln famously said when he
met her so you're the little woman that
started this great war you know you know
in a way that that's right because you
know a lot of people's I've never met a
black I have no idea what a slave even
is if you're in the north now I see why
this is so abhorrent hmm right and you
know back to to this idea of hate speech
the problem again once you go down that
road this is the argument I make in the
book is that in the 1850s there were
southern congressmen who fought against
northern abolitionists coming down to
give speeches in the south or publish
articles in newspapers in the south or
get books published and distributed in
the South that were pro abolitionists
their argument was this could lead to
slave revolts and riots and violence
therefore we have to silence that now
they didn't use the word hate speech but
they would that's what today it would be
called abolitionist speech to abolish
slavery is hate speech
that's insane right and in the same
thing in the civil rights movement they
in 1960s there were people in the South
that said you know when Malcolm X comes
down here or Martin Luther King comes
down here and they give a speech this is
not good this is it to use that the
Supreme Court justices words a clear and
present danger to the peaceful nature of
our society we have to silence them
that's a similar conversation I had with
a friend who's very progressive when
this there was a thing that was going on
for a while or people were saying
punched Nazis and what I think they were
really saying is they were sort of they
were proclaiming their connection to
this progressive ideology proclaiming it
so much so that hey man I'm willing to
fucking draw blood I'm willing to punch
Nazis and so I was saying that this is a
dangerous thing and they said well why
do you think it's dangerous I said well
first of all what if they punch you back
then then you've got a real fucking
problem you know like you are you you're
you're espousing violence like that's
always a bad idea and second of all I've
heard a lot of people called Nazis that
I don't think are really Nazis like Ben
Shapiro he's Jewish
I've seen people call him Nazis I've
seen it written I'm like who's wearing
it he's wearing a yarmulke yes and
people people still call him a Nazi so
the point is like who is to decide who
is a Nazi if you're saying like there's
a guy and he's he's running the gas
chamber at a concentration camp and he's
relishing the fact that he's gonna put
these Jews to death
that's a Nazi but yeah punch that guy
okay yeah but that's not what you're
talking about you're using this word in
this very sort of flippant way and it
becomes very dangerous to just say punch
Nazis because you're just deciding
people or Nazis who are definitely not
Nazis and a lot of them are actually
Jewish which is it hatton Lee insane I
think that beam started after somebody
punch Richard Spencer on the sidewalk he
was out given one of his little yeah
white supremacist speech to somebody
punched him now I have to admit you know
people like Richard Spencer
these are just assholes and yeah you
know there's videos of them taunting
african-americans that are out singing
you know we shall overcome and these
guys are they're laughing at them and
kind of up in their faces you know and
emotionally I feel like I would just
like to punch that motherfucker because
that is wrong but this is why we can't
go down that road because the whole
point of a civilized society is we can't
just have people punching each other
what we need to do is put that guy on a
vacation with Darrell Davis make him so
he can't go anywhere he's gonna hang out
with Darrell for many days at a time and
by the end of it hopefully he would get
it you know then hopefully he's not so
as we were talking about earlier it's
not so connected with those ideas that
those ideas are him you know we've got
to be as a society more flexible in the
way we hang on to ideas and I think that
that's something that needs to be taught
to people because there's a sort of a
built-in reaction that we have to defend
our ideas and when you're young and
you're learning how to debate things and
you were learning how to argue things
the sting of losing is very personal and
so you've sort of built in these do
build in these defense mechanisms into
their personality into their vernacular
into the way they communicate where you
you do think of your ideas as a part of
you but if you really care about you you
should care about objective truth and
you should care about recognizing when
an idea that you're holding on to sucks
you know if you are valuable if you care
about yourself you should recognize when
an idea that you're you're clinging to
is not a good one yeah yeah there was
that documentary film about white
supremacists by that Muslim woman I
forget the name of the film and her name
I'm sorry but she's basically hanging
out with I think it was Richard Spencer
Jared Taylor and a few of the others
particularly after Charlottesville and
and they're talking to her that you
could tell they really liked her first
of all she's an attractive woman so you
see these guys are like
oh boy now this attractive woman's
paying attention to me and and so she's
very disarming in this way and she says
well just tell me what you believe so
they articulate all their beliefs about
you know white brown people are inferior
to white people and so on and she's like
you know I'm I'm brown they're like oh
this doesn't apply to you oh I see okay
why not well because you know I know you
like right yeah I think there was a line
in there where you said well I know you
so these things don't apply to you it's
like right okay therein lies the problem
just we just don't know these other
people okay so we stereotype them and
you know that's part of our cognition
stereotyping it's a perfectly normal
thing we stereotype all kinds of things
we put them into bins cognitive bins so
we can keep track of them and and
distinguish them from others
unfortunately we do that with people
yeah and it's a normal thing that people
have done since the beginning of time to
sort of recognize who's in your tribe
and who's not back when we were these
little groups of 50 people and we'd get
invaded by another group of 50 people
and you had to be loyal to your group
yeah my friend Jared Diamond tells the
story of you know he goes to Papa New
Guinea every year to to go birding and
then now been doing anthropology work as
well but back in the day he said they
would go out birding and he'd have one
of his pup into Guinean hunter-gatherers
with him on some hiking trail somewhere
and there got their binoculars and so on
and they encounter some stranger from
another tribe and Jared's like hey let's
go talk to that guy and his buddy is
like are you out of your mind we could
be killed we don't know who that guy is
and probably you might be eaten as well
not just killed so you know but the
point of Jared's story is that that's
the environment in which we evolved it
yeah there's a there's a kind of a logic
to xenophobia like other people are
dangerous you know like that my favorite
line from a few good men were Jack
Nicholson is schooling the Tom Cruise
character you know about you know you
can't handle the truth what's the truth
the truth is we live in a world with
walls and on those walls are men with
guns and you want me on that wall you
need me on that wall and when you're at
parties enjoying your freedom I'm on the
wall right and I remember seeing that
thing in yeah that's actually true
that's a very good description of the
we evolved it's a very walled off tribal
environment that we evolved these moral
emotions so there's a logic to
xenophobia that we've been pushing back
against by saying okay let's increase
our sphere of who we count as a member
of our tribe we've been getting better
at that but we're pushing back against
those natural impulses like it's a
little risky to do that we have to be
careful about the so autocrats tend to
jump on that go well you know immigrants
are dangerous people or brown people are
dangerous whether you know white
supremacists do that and you know that
so that's a that's a long history we're
pushing back against well these
ideologies that people subscribe to I
saw a lot of them evaporate when this
lockdown took place because a lot of my
friends that are anti-gun we're asking
me how to get a gun like what do you do
how do you get a gun I'm like you want a
gun my wife says I should get a gun a
friend of mine who says his wife is
always like you're never getting a gun
do you were not having a gun in this
house the moment the shit hit the fan
she goes we got to get a gun that was a
hit he was laughing he's like she told
me to get a gun you believe this and he
grew up in the south so he's used to
being around guns but this is this is
when people realize like well there's a
reason why people are Preppers some of
them are insane yeah but it's also hey
if the fucking grid goes down there's no
power you should have a certain amount
of food since I seen you here a little
while it's a good idea it's a good idea
to have a method of filtrating water
it's a good idea and then I've also
gotten a ton of questions from people on
how do you get into hunting how do you
get into hunting like and it's like it's
a complex question it's a long road it's
not an easy thing to learn how to hunt
but from people that never had any
interested in it before but now they
realize like hey I went to the grocery
store today and there's no fucking meat
like I want meat like what what do I do
for food like oh there's animals roaming
around that's what okay how do you get
these animals like what are you doing
and it's you know you realize why people
hold on to certain beliefs that some
people find distasteful yeah there's a
certain logic to hoarding even if no one
wants to do it again it's like this
pluralistic ignorance problem everybody
thinks that everybody else wants to do
yes but of course they want to do that
the solution is you just put limits it's
like hunting hunting licenses and you
have a limit to how many you can shoot
and so on you know yeah and and lots of
industries have adopted that to solve
the tragedy of the Commons problem my
local Vaughn solved it by saying you can
only buy one packet of toilet paper per
shopper per day that's it and and I
think everybody was kind of glad about
that like okay good now there's toilet
paper on the shelves I don't have to
worry about hoarding I have to worry
about that asshole taking two and I get
none yeah and you know and and really
it's even if you buy say well we're just
selfish creatures yeah we are that's
right but we're all but we also want to
do the right thing but we need some kind
of norms and laws and customs or
whatever in place to kind of attenuate
the inner demons and accentuate the
better angels and that everybody can see
that and then they feel better about
like okay I'm just gonna buy one and I
can a hoard or whatever now you
mentioned the south there's interesting
research Richard Nisbett and his
colleagues on the culture of Honor
that's more common in the south than in
the north and that in a culture of honor
you solve your own problems you don't
turn to authorities or the state okay
and kind of in general on average also
in the south particularly in
african-american communities law
enforcement and the judicial system has
not been very fair so you can't really
trust them so you do kind of have to
take the law into your own hands
therefore there's more guns more gun
violence in the south there's kind of a
logic to it and that so it is but did
these famous experiments that are kind
of amusing now where you'd have subjects
come in and fill out a form for some
fake experiment they were doing and then
you have to walk down the hall and give
the form to the person in that room too
at the end of the hall we're in the
hallway there's like a bank of lockers
or filing cabinets or something and
there's somebody working there and
pulling out the door or whatever and as
the person walks by this person working
there who's just a shield for the
experiment kind of leans back and bumps
into this person and says asshole so the
question is what does this person do now
so anyway they do all follow-up surveys
and they drew blood and all this stuff
people from the notes too
from the north were like you know
whatever I don't you know I don't care
they would apologize to the guy that
said asshole people from the south
they're like that motherfucker called me
an asshole you know and they were mad
and then when they drew the blood their
stress hormones were higher testosterone
was higher and so anyway his theory is
that the sat that democracy came late to
the southern United States the rule of
law and the idea that the state has a
monopoly on the legitimate use of force
which is how government is defined and
and therefore southerners had to kind of
take the law into their own hands that
is to say you know we're gonna develop a
culture of honor and we're gonna take
care of matters ourselves because
everybody wants justice everybody wants
right to be done and wrong to be
punished that's normal and if the
state's not doing it if the state says
we're gonna do that so you don't have to
do it so we're gonna disarm the
citizenry and we're going to take care
of that through a a court system and a
police system and so on but if they're
not doing it or they're doing it
unjustly and some communities like I've
read them in American communities are
treated differently then of course
they're gonna push back so that's why
there's more gun sales and more
homicides in the south and in the north
and anyway I just thought of that when
you mention that it's a very interesting
subject so your book comes out when is
out now tomorrow's it officially but
you're gonna actually order I just
checked on Amazon this mornings like oh
it's already for sale okay so that
tomorrow will actually be today because
this is gonna be released tomorrow so
and it's called give the devil his due
gimme the devil his day being the devil
his due gets to the little little chess
piece there is our art director - the
little devil there yeah excellent all
right well I always enjoyed talking to
Michael I really appreciate you and
hopefully next time I see you we can
actually have dinner together again we
will give studio next time that's right
all right we'll be back to that all
right man
take care of you all right bye everybody
[Music]